The EUROCALL Review, Volume 25, No. 2, September 2017
Research paper
A look at advanced learners' use of mobile devices for
English language study: Insights from interview data
Mariusz Kruk
University of Zielona Gora, Poland
mkruk @ uz.zgora.pl
Abstract
The paper discusses the results of a study which explored advanced learners of English
engagement with their mobile devices to develop learning experiences that meet their
needs and goals as foreign language learners. The data were collected from 20 students
by means of a semi-structured interview. The gathered data were subjected to
qualitative and quantitative analysis. The results of the study demonstrated that, on the
one hand, some subjects manifested heightened awareness relating to the
advantageous role of mobile devices in their learning endeavors, their ability to reach
for suitable tools and retrieve necessary information so as to achieve their goals, meet
their needs and adjust their learning of English to their personal learning styles, and on
the other, a rather intuitive and/or ad hoc use of their mobile devices in the classroom.
Keywords: Learner autonomy, mobile devices, advanced EFL learners, learning
English.
1. Introduction
Mobile devices, smartphones and tablet computers in particular, have generated a lot of
interest among researchers in recent years (Byrne & Diem, 2014). This is because the
opportunities these new technologies may offer (e.g. individualized learning, the variety
of mobile apps available, easy access to the internet) and/or the fact that they are
increasingly more common among learners make them an important and potentially
useful addition to formal and informal language learning.
According to Benson (2011), there has always been a connection between educational
technologies and learner autonomy to the extent that they have often been intended for
independent practice. It should be noted, however, that this link and "future enquiry
and practice into technology-mediated learner autonomy will need to be increasingly
aligned to the tools, settings, and activities that are of significance to language learners"
(Reinders & White, 2016, p. 151). Reinders and White (2016) further argue that as long
as "the potential range of settings, tools, and experiences is now virtually limitless,
individuals need to be increasingly adept at critical adaptive learning in order to benefit
from and contribute effectively to those settings" (p. 151). Beyond doubt, contemporary
language teachers should equip foreign/second language learners with appropriate
knowledge concerning the affordances of mobile devices for language study and they
should prepare them for effective usage of such devices for this purpose. It is also of
paramount importance, for both researchers and practitioners, to comprehend the link
between the modalities of the language learners' organization of their own learning
experiences and environments and the role mobile technologies, in particular
smartphones and tablets, play in these contexts.
Taking into consideration the above-mentioned issues, the study reported in this article
investigated ways advanced English language students use their mobile devices (i.e.
smartphones and tablet computers) for their language learning. The article commences
with a short overview of relevant literature. Next, the design of the study is described,
18
The EUROCALL Review, Volume 25, No. 2, September 2017
description or participants, data collection tools an
alesis. This is Followed by the seesentation or the results of the study The artic
closes with discussion and conclusions.
2. Literature review
2.1. Autonomy in foreign/second language learning
he concept of autonomy in second/foreign language learning and teaching has bee
he focus of attention for many researchers and practitioners for more than thre
decades. According to Benson (2001), the notion of autonomy was introduced and
popularized in 1981 by Henri Holec in his seminal report for the Council of Europe
entitled Autonomy in Foreign Language Learning in which the researcher defined
autonomy in the context of language learning as "the ability to take charge of one's own
learning" (Holec, 1981, p. 3). Holec's idea of autonomy encompasses some components
and capacities on the part of language learners (e.g. self-directed learning). For some
other authors autonomy also involves "a capacity - for detachment, critical reflection,
decision-making, and independent action" (Little, 1991, p. 4) and "the capacity to take
control of one's own learning" (Benson, 2001, p. 46). As stated by Benson (2011, p.
16), "autonomy is multidimensional and takes many different forms according to the
person, the setting, and multiple contextual and micro-contextual factors" and it is "a
multi-faceted concept that consists of several layers" (Reinders, 2011, p. 48) whose
roots are based in political, societal and educational developments. In addition to this,
work on autonomy emphasizes social dimensions of learner autonomy in view of the
fact that "autonomous learners always do things for themselves, but they may or may
not do things on their own" (Little, 2009, p. 223) and that by means of social
interactions language learners "develop a capacity to analyze, reflect upon and
synthesize information to create new perspectives" (Lee, 2011, p. 88). It should also be
noted that recent research shows that fostering autonomy is no longer predominantly a
matter of individualizing learning through out-of-class initiatives since the dominance of
classroom-based approaches (Benson, 2011). Finally, it has to be added that
researchers, in general, seem to be in agreement with the following claims suggested
by Benson (2011): "(a) language learners naturally tend to take control of their
learning, (b) learners who lack autonomy are capable of developing it, and (c)
autonomous language learning is more effective than non-autonomous language
learning" (p. 16).
Perhaps in order to define the concept of autonomy in language learning it is necessary
to understand who autonomous learners are. As Littlewood (1996) claims, an
autonomous learner is "one who has independent capacity to make and carry out
choices which govern his or her actions" (p. 428). The researcher argues that this
capacity depends on two major components such as ability and willingness, and he
claims that the attributes can also be further subdivided. Thus, ability depends on
having knowledge about the options from which one can choose and skills so as to
choose the most suitable alternatives. When it comes to willingness, this depends on
having motivation and confidence in order to take responsibility for adequate choices.
Moreover, Littlewood (1996) argues that if an individual is to be successful in being
autonomous, all of these components have to be present all together.
Reinders (2011), who defines autonomous language learning as "an act of learning
whereby motivated learners consciously make informed decisions about that learning"
(p. 48). According to the said researcher, it is not possible or needed in all acts of
learning to be able or ready to intentionally make decisions since different learning
situations present different demands. Reinders (2011) further argues that "autonomy is
not an either-or concept, but has to be seen as a continuum" (p. 48). This is because a
learner can display more or less autonomy in different learning circumstances.
Autonomy, in Reinders' terms changes over time between skills and within skills and
thus it is difficult to achieve and is not invariably permanent (Reinders, 2011).
19
The EUROCALL Review, Volume 25, No. 2, September 2017
2.2. Autonomy and new technologies
As stated in the previous section, the concept of autonomy has been one of the most
researched areas in the field of second/foreign language learning and teaching over the
last few decades. It should be noted, however, that the field of learner autonomy
started to be influenced by technology in the mid-1990s as a result of the growing
influence of the internet on almost every sphere of our life (including second/foreign
language education) and the opportunities for online collaboration and communication
(Reinders & White, 2016). As stated by Benson and Chik (2010), the latest generations
of new technologies, particularly those encompassing the internet, user-generated Web
content and mobility, seem to be having a bearing on the way autonomous language
learning develops. Perhaps, one of the most important benefits of implementing new
technologies into language learning is the fact that they provide occasions for language
learners who do not have direct access to the target language. This is because the use
of new technologies, including mobile technology, allow them to "bypass classrooms and
go directly to target language texts and users through the internet and social media"
(Benson, 2011, p. 17).
When it comes to the use of mobile technology, and, in particular, smartphones and
tablet computers, for learning a foreign or second language, they can assist language
learners with their learning endeavors by granting access to numerous language
resources whenever and wherever such learners need them and/or they happen to be
(Jones, 2015). In Jones's opinion, such language involvement might comprise, for
instance, the use of chunks of spare time for language practice, searching for target
language vocabulary in relevant contexts or interactions on social media (Jones, 2015).
Furthermore, by having a mobile device a language learner has the opportunity to take
control of his or her learning, direct it and engage in language activities that meet his or
her individual needs and goals (Kukulska-Hulme, Traxler & Pettit, 2007; Pettit &
Kukulska-Hulme 2007).
Given the importance attached to new technologies, and, in particular the potential role
of mobile devices in
language learning,
theterms mobile
learning and mobile devices (MobDs) need first to be explained. As for mobile learning,
no single agreed-upon definition of the term exists in the literature (Oz, 2015). This is
because some researchers define mobile learning as an extension of e-learning built
upon mobile devices whereas some other researchers understand it as learning that
happens anywhere and anytime (cf. Oz, 2015). As far as mobile devices are concerned,
they can be defined as "any device that is small, autonomous and unobtrusive enough
to accompany us in every moment and can be used for educational purposes"
(Trifanova Knapp, Ronchetti & Gamper, 2004, p. 3) or as "hand held electronic devices
that can be comfortably carried around in a pocket or bag, including MP3 players, digital
recorders, e-readers, tablets, and smartphones" (Kukulska-Hulme, Norris & Donohue,
2015, p. 39).
A lot of studies concerning the use of mobile technology and mobile devices in language
learning have been published. The findings of these studies concentrated on, for
example, language learners' views on the use of mobile devices in language instruction
(e.g. Oz, 2015), students' attitudes towards using mobile phones as instructional tools
for foreign language learning (e.g. Cakir, 2015), profiling mobile language learners (e.g.
Byrne & Diem, 2014), their effect on learning a foreign/second language (e.g. Nah,
White & Sussex, 2008; Cavus & Ibrahim, 2009; Zhang, Song & Burston, 2011),
distance language learning (e.g. Demouy, Jones, Kan, Kukulska-Hulme & Eardley,
2016), informal language learning practices (Reinders & Cho, 2011; Jones, 2015),
learners' use of mobile devices for learning a foreign language (Stockwell, 2007;
Dashtestani, 2015) and autonomy in language learning (e.g. Díaz-Vera, 2012; Djoub,
2015). In addition to this, researchers investigated a number of applications of mobile
devices and presented both benefits and drawbacks of the usage of mobile technologies
(e.g. Miangah & Nezarat, 2012), discussed the use of mobile devices in supporting
social contacts and collaborative learning (e.g. Kukulska-Hulme & Shield, 2008) and
offered guidelines related to the implementation of mobile learning into second/foreign
language instruction (e.g. Kukulska-Hulme et al., 2015).
20
PDF extraction limited to the first 3 pages